Sync CNV runbook GuestVCPUQueueHighWarning.md (Updated at 2025-08-10 09:17:19 +0000 UTC) (#315)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/openshift-virtualization-operator/GuestVCPUQueueHighWarning.md

# GuestVCPUQueueHighWarning

## Meaning

> A VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) reported a
> **guest CPU run‑queue length greater than 10** runnable or
> uninterruptible threads within the most‑recent scrape window (120s).
> The run‑queue length is derived from `guest_load_1m – vCPU_count`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the most recent scrape window (120 seconds), 
a VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) reported a
**guest CPU run‑queue length of more than 10** runnable or
uninterruptible threads. The run‑queue length
is derived from `guest_load_1m – vCPU_count`.
```

## Impact
* Moderate CPU contention inside the guest;
  latency may spike but workload still progresses.

> * Early signal that the VM might need additional vCPUs or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An early signal that the VM might need additional vCPUs or
```

  that a short‑lived process is causing bursts.

## Diagnosis
1. **Confirm queue length**
   ```promql
   kubevirt_vmi_guest_vcpu_queue{namespace="$NS",name="$VM"}
   ```
2. **Check host CPU usage**
   ```promql
   rate(kubevirt_vmi_cpu_usage_seconds_total{namespace="$NS",name="$VM"}[2m])
   ```
3. **Inspect guest processes**
   `virtctl console <vm>` → `top -H` or `pidstat -u 1`
4. **Verify vCPU allocation**
   ```bash
   oc get vmi $VM -ojsonpath='{.spec.domain.cpu}'
   ```

## Mitigation

> | Horizon | Action |
> |---------|--------|
> | Immediate | Optionally live‑migrate the VM to a quieter node or throttle
> |
> |           | noisy processes.                                                |
> | Short term | Hot‑plug / increase vCPUs; tune application thread pools.
>  |
> | Long term  | Implement horizontal scaling (HPA/KEDA, VMReplicaSet); review   |
> |            | placement rules.                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Immediately:** Consider live-migrating the VM to a node under a lighter load, 
or throttle demanding processes.
* **Short term:** Hot-plug or increase vCPU limit; tune application thread pools.
* **Long term:** Implement horizontal scaling (HPA/KEDA, VMReplicaSet); 
review placement rules.                                               |
```
